(Originally posted at <https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=27639177>.)

Money doesn’t objectively exist; it’s purely a figment of people’s
imagination.  This ten-trillion-Zimbabwean-dollar bill isn’t money
anymore, even though it used to be, and it isn’t physically changed in
any relevant way.  The only thing that changed was how people thought
of it.

It might seem strange to say that a purely imaginary thing like money
could be “the driver/catalyst for everything” in industrialization,
but many strange things are true.  I’m writing you this note in
letters of lightning far too small to see, which are persistently
trembling within a few tiny slivers of quartz that can thus contain
the lightning because the vital air has been removed from it—stranger
still, but true, because that is how DRAM chips work.

Still, let’s see if we can analyze how industrialization happens in
terms of objectively existing reality rather than shared
hallucinations like money—surely the picture will be partial, but it
may still be useful.  Industrialization itself seems to be objectively
observable: it doubles people’s life expectancy at birth.

Let’s start with an outside view of economic production as a whole.
How would we explain it to a Martian?

People work, planting and harvesting and preparing food.  If they do
not eat food, they die in a few months from lack of various molecules
crucial to their biochemistry and energy (collectively “nutrition”).
They expend energy and water and damage their bodies by working,
damages which they repair automatically if they have time to rest, but
which will otherwise eventually kill them.  So their capacity for work
is limited.  Not everyone has to work, but if the people collectively
produce too little food from their work, then they will start dying
from lack of nutrition, and pretty soon they will all die.  One old
book of poetry sums this up by saying, “In the sweat of thy face shalt
thou eat bread.”

On the other hand, if they can make a lot of food despite their
limited work capacity, more than they need to survive—a “surplus”—many
of them will live for decades, they will reproduce, and their
population will increase, typically by about 4% per year.  Groups that
manage to do this come to vastly outnumber groups that do not.

(There are some other material necessities for human survival and
reproduction besides food, but none of them are different in relevant
ways, so for the time being I’ll stick to food.)

The other conventional factors besides labor that affect productivity
are land and something called “capital”.  Some land yields a lot of
food and is easy to plant and harvest; other land yields very little.
By “capital” is conventionally meant not money but durable goods that
increase labor and land productivity, such as hoes and
waterwheel-driven mills for making flour.  If people don’t need to
spend their entire labor capacity on making enough food to survive,
they can instead devote some of it to making these durable goods:
cords, needles, ropes, bows and arrows, shoes, knives, hoes, axes,
pots, and so on.  Cords and ropes enable you to climb palm trees, hang
meat over a fire, or bridle a horse; needles enable you to make
clothing and all manner of sturdy, flexible fiber goods; bows and
arrows enable you to kill dinner at a distance; shoes enable you to
walk or run longer distances; knives and axes make cooking and
woodworking much easier; hoes allow you to plant much more land; pots
enable not only cooking but food storage and the storage of other
goods; and so on.

So these are “capital goods”: once you have a surplus, then by
spending some of your work creating durable goods instead of
satisfying basic necessities for survival, you thenceforth multiply
their possessors’ future production, or at least until the durable
goods stop enduring.  But a hoe or a blast furnace is produced in the
same way as a vegetable garden: people work to turn raw materials into
the desired end product, directed by their skills and knowledge.
Instead of hoeing the field today, perhaps they’re hammering the hoe
blade into shape or molding bricks from fireclay.  Most capital goods
are more or less specialized to a particular sort of production—you
cannot harvest more corn by dumping blast furnaces or gristmills into
the cornfield—though some are more versatile than others.

I haven’t mentioned skills and energy before, but they’re crucially
important.  A person is skilled when they can direct their work to
produce their intended results with ease and precision, and labor
specialization develops skill much more highly.

Energy is a fundamental physical quantity which can be converted
between many different forms, including heat and kinetic energy; many
kinds of work require a lot of kinetic energy and a lot of heat, and
this has historically often been the limiting resource for work
productivity, particularly when all the relevant kinetic energy came
via people’s muscles from their food, and all the relevant heat came
from firewood.

The available kinetic energy for production has greatly expanded five
times in the past: ox-yokes (6000 years ago), horse-collars (1500
years ago, in the Sui), the steam-engine (250 years ago), and electric
dynamos and motors (140 years ago).  Photovoltaic cells seem at long
last to be adding a sixth item to this list now that they have finally
become cheaper than steam-engines.

The available heat energy for production has greatly expanded three
times: fire (400,000 years ago), oil drilling (2300 years ago), and
deep-shaft coal mining (250 years ago).  Again, photovoltaics are
probably a huge factor here today.

So, in these terms, we can analyze industrialization as a set of
several major synergistic shifts.

First, enormously increased specialization, which would have been
counterproductive to effective productivity in the absence of the
worldwide markets created by the British Empire and by cheaper
transport via canals.  The ten workers in Adam Smith’s pin factory
could produce 48000 pins a day, far more pins than a village could
use, or maybe even a city—perhaps each household might ruin five or
six pins in a day as they repaired their clothing.  Without easy
shipping, the tonnes of pins thus produced would be as worthless as an
asteroid belt converted into paperclips.

Second, enormously increased use of capital goods enabled by that
specialization—only a few decades after Smith observed his pin
factories of ten or eighteen men, the whole operation became automated
by cam-driven pin-making machinery, further decreasing the labor per
pin, and of course the rise of the spinning-machines and jacquard and
other automated looms is even more notorious.

Third, as improved capital goods like the cotton gin and the combine
harvester became abundant, the planting and harvesting of larger and
larger amounts of land required less and less labor, so smaller and
smaller amounts of farming work per person sufficed to prevent mass
starvation.  This surplus manifested as a mass population migration
from the countryside to the cities, where increasingly specialized
capital-intensive production of all kinds was carried on by large
crews of people harnessing steam power, rather than by individual
farmers plowing behind teams of horses.

Fourth, *invention* became central to economic production in the newly
industrializing countries, as it had been a thousand years before in
the Song; we can think of an invention as a skill that has been
digitized, expressed in words or pictures so that it can be copied,
rather than having to be learned by practice.  New notions of
precision, innovation, specification, tolerances, and standardization
became central to work in a way entirely foreign to previous
generations.  New notions of measurement and metaphors of clockwork
universes allowed the implicit to become explicit, legible, and
reproducible.

Fifth, the advent of the steam-engine, which permitted pumping water
out of deep-shaft coal mines, which provided a vastly increased fuel
supply.

— ⁂ —

In none of the above do we find any money, or for that matter any
elites or banks or other corporations.  All of it could, at least
hypothetically, have happened through Stakhanovite altruism or
telepathic mind control, if human nature contained such possibilities.
The investment of surplus production capacity in capital goods which
thenceforth further increase the production surplus, faster than the
human population can increase, combined with labor specialization,
urbanization, and invention, creates industrialization, and that is
what creates the profligate material abundance and extended lifespans
we are struggling to cope with today.

But of course it is not enough that such a pattern of changes improves
the overall welfare; if the *status quo ante* is a Nash equilibrium,
anybody who unilaterally attempts to automate pinmaking, invent cotton
gins, or move to a city might merely impoverish themself and their
family.  Indeed, if you merely specialize in pinmaking, surely you
will have made more pins than your family needs within only a few
weeks—and how will they eat this winter if you’ve spent the whole
planting season making pins instead of plowing?  Even if your aunts
and uncles will plow for you, they probably don’t need that many pins
either.

And *this* is where money comes in: trade gamifies work by allowing
you to cooperate productively with people you don’t trust, breaking
the Nash equilibrium that keeps everybody poor, and money enormously
simplifies trade.  You can ship a box of pins from your French pin
factory to Spain or England or some godforsaken place like
Connecticut, and receive gold in return, which you can use to buy both
potatoes and better pin-making machinery.  As you said, it’s a
lubricant.

Modern capitalism largely arose in the Industrial Revolution as a form
of gambling.  Many entrepreneurs can bootstrap: a machinist can buy a
lathe, a drill, a work-bench, a file, dividers, a square, etc., with
his wages as a machinist’s apprentice, and as long as he has a
“production surplus” (now, as measured in the collective hallucination
of money, rather than in the increased harvests of the farmers using
his machinery) he can keep improving and buying machinery to increase
his productive capacity and thus his surplus, and perhaps begin to
hire workers—not apprentices for a limited term, now, as in
pre-capitalist craft production, but employees for life.  But a
competing machinist who sells her business to capitalists (whether a
few wealthy investors or many subscribers) suddenly has enormously
more money with which to buy such tools, and perhaps she can win
customers away from the bootstrapped entrepreneur, producing superior
goods at a lower price because of her superior tools.

Effectively the capitalist is offering the worker a deal: the
capitalist provides the tools, the worker provides the labor, and each
receives part of the value produced.  In capitalism *qua* capitalism,
the worker is an employee and receives a *fixed* wage, while the
capitalist receives a variable profit, but of course there are lots of
other variations; the machinist might take a loan from a bank or rent
the tools, precisely reversing the roles, or someone who’s nominally
merely an employee might receive most of their compensation in the
form of incentive stock options.

From the point of view of economic development, these questions of how
the pie is divided are minor, but they matter enormously to the
participants.  This division depends mostly on cultural expectations
and on the negotiating positions and skills of the parties; in an
industrialized economy, the capitalist has a very strong negotiating
position, since capital goods like drill presses and rail locomotives
are very commonly the critical limiting factor in productivity.  For
many expensive products that can be cut on a lathe, there are fewer
lathes that can turn them than machinists skilled enough to turn them.
The machinist without a lathe must resort to backyard aluminum casting
and hand scraping before he can start to turn parts.

Ultimately, though, the money is just a scorekeeping device, a
lubricant.  What makes the machine shop more or less productive is not
the money, but the tools it bought, which were necessarily produced by
the production surplus of the existing economy.  If suddenly machine
shops as a whole attract a hundred times as much investment, it won’t
make their productivity skyrocket by bringing a hundred times as much
tools into existence—it will just drive up the price of the tools.
Pretty soon it will drive up the prices of the machine shops’
products, too, since if their management doesn’t deliver a respectable
return on that investment, it will be replaced, and if that doesn’t
fix it, the company will be shut down.  These higher prices will tend
to *decrease* the market for the products.

When we’re talking about international capital flows, we also have the
well-known resource curse or Dutch disease: investing a lot of money
from England in US companies will tend to devalue the pound relative
to the dollar, which makes US products less economically competitive
and/or UK products more economically competitive.  This is precisely
the opposite of driving US industrialization.

— ⁂ —

So if some Englishman sent a bunch of money across the Atlantic to
invest in nascent industrialization, that wouldn’t speed up the
industrialization—unless a bunch of that money went *back* across the
Atlantic to buy the capital goods needed for industrialization.  Maybe
it did!  From 01780 to 01824 artisans were forbidden to emigrate from
Britain, and exportation of metalworking or glass manufacturing
equipment was likewise forbidden; but these prohibitions were widely
flouted, and at any rate they excluded steam-engines, and they ended
in 01843.  A lot of the machinery and artisans during this time went
to the US.  The “American System of Manufacturing” was the world’s
most advanced manufacturing technology by the mid-01850s.

More likely, though, if someone in England was investing in US
industrial firms in the 01800-01850 period, they weren’t meaningfully
promoting a flow of needed capital goods from England to America; they
were just giving the American firms they invested in a leg up on
competing American firms, and perhaps other sectors of the US economy,
like the slave plantations.

But where does Junius Morgan come into all this?  Well, it turns out
that Junius S. Morgan was born in Massachusetts in 01813; his father
was a Revolutionary War veteran and one of the founders of Aetna in
01819.  Junius Morgan was a partner in various US banks from 01833 to
01853, inheriting his father’s fortune in 01847 and then becoming a
partner in London’s leading *American* bank in 01854.  So *that* was
when he started funneling British investors’ money into American
industrial companies by selling things such as railway bonds.
J. P. had nothing to do with it!  He started working with his father
in London in 01857 and acting as his father’s overseas agent in the US
in 01860.

Moreover, by this point it was no longer a question of “driving
industrialization” in America.  The US had already been the world’s
leading industrial power for decades.  The B&O railroad opened in
01830, using a US-built locomotive; by 01861 it had 236 locomotives,
3451 rail cars, and 826 km of railroad, and it had many domestic
competitors.  In 01830 the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, the first
intercity railway and the first to be powered entirely by steam, also
opened.  The US had power looms from 01815, milling machines by 01816,
small arms with interchangeable parts by the 01830s, 2000 steam
engines by 01838, cloth exports from the 01830s, electric telegraphs
from 01844, and invented the Corliss steam engine in 01848.

So, Morgan was far too late to drive industrialization in the US.  He
certainly did make a lot of money from it, though.  And he arguably
got a lot of other people to invest in its expansion—US industry
expanded a lot in the second half of the 19th century.
